debug: implement `treeRepr()` for `PNode` (#191)
nim-works/nimskull: doc/debug.rst

`nimCompilerDebugCalltrace`  Call trace reports
`nimCompilerDebugTraceDir`   Write call traces to the directory
============================ =======

Semantic analysis
-----------------

When `nimDebugUtils` is enabled you can annotate section of the code to
trace how semantic analysis is performed on this block of code. Each
procedure that is annotated with one of the `addInNimDebugUtils()`
overloads is going to be traced in the execution tree. For example -
`sem.semOverloadedCall`, triggered when it is necessary to analyze call to
overloaded procedure.

.. code-block:: nim

    proc semOverloadedCall(c: PContext, n, nOrig: PNode,
                           filter: TSymKinds, flags: TExprFlags): PNode {.nosinks.} =
      addInNimDebugUtils(c.config, "semOverloadedCall")
      # Other implementaion parts ...

If you compile your test file with `nim c -d:nimCompilerDebugCalltrace
--filenames:canonical file.nim`:cmd: and annotate code block with the
`nimCompilerDebug` wrapper.

.. code-block:: nim

    {.define(nimCompilerDebug).}
    vmTarget(Obj())
    {.undef(nimCompilerDebug).}

You will get all the call entries traced

.. important::

>      Both *compiler* and and your file must be compiled with defines - main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     Both *compiler* and your file must be compiled with defines:
```

>      compiler requires `nimDebugUtils` (this guard exists to avoid heavy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - compiler requires `nimDebugUtils` (this guard exists to avoid heavy
```

>      performance hits), and your test compiler need to be run with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     performance hits), and your file needs to be compiled with
```

Author: no, it means that main compiler compiles tests compiler, there is no error. Previous suggestion removing `main` is also incorrect.

Author: I don't know how to word this properly, but considering we are compiling the compiler to compile the file there is bound to be some weird phrasing

Reviewer: Then I need to follow through the instructions again, because I'm not getting the mechanics.

I would think we'd want to flip switches (defines) that would produce a test compiler that'll output all the things. Then when we go to use that test compiler we provide more switches (defines) that would control the output.

Reviewer: My understanding is:
1. Create a compiler that knows to trace (compile a test compiler with defines)
2. Use the test compiler created in the prior step to compile your program with tracing parameters to control the output

    #0]< semExpr @ sem/semexprs.nim(2948, 21) from sem/semstmts.nim(2446, 1)
    #0]> semExpr @ sem/semexprs.nim(2948, 21) from sem/semstmts.nim(2446, 1)
    <<] trace end

Formatting of the report is implemented in the `cli_reporter.nim` as well
(all debug reports are also transferred using regular reporting pipeline).
It has a lot of information, but general parts for each call parts are:

.. code-block:: literal

   #2]    < semOverloadedCall @ sem/semcall.nim(569, 21) from sem/semexprs.nim(950, 1)
   ^      ^ ^                   ^                             ^
   |      | |                   |                             Where proc has been called from
   |      | |                   Location of the `addInNimDebugUtils()` - the proc itsemf
   |      | Name of the proc
   |      Whether proc has been entered or exited
   Depth of the traced call tree

If test compiler is executed with `-d:nimCompilerDebugTraceDir=/some/dir`
option the reports stored between different sections are written into
separate files in this directory. This is extremely helpful if you want to
track bugs where you can clearly find "this works" and "this doesn't work"

> versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
versions. This debugging technique is referred to differential debugging or sometimes differential diagnosis.
```

Reviewer: So we build common terminology in the community.

implementation.

.. code-block:: nim

    c.config.addInNimDebugUtils("qualifiedLookup2", n, result)

This change results in the two more entries added to the call trace:

.. code-block:: nim

    #1]  > qualifiedLookup2 @ sem/lookups.nim(732, 11) from sem/semexprs.nim(3070, 1)
             kind:stepNodeToSym
             from node:
               Ident check
    #1]  < qualifiedLookup2 @ sem/lookups.nim(732, 11) from sem/semexprs.nim(3070, 1)
             kind:stepNodeToSym
             to sym:
               Let
                 typ:   Int sk:Type
                 owner:  kind:skProc name:foo1

.. code-block:: nim

    #1]  > qualifiedLookup2 @ sem/lookups.nim(732, 11) from sem/semexprs.nim(3070, 1)
             kind:stepNodeToSym
             from node:
               Ident check
    #1]  < qualifiedLookup2 @ sem/lookups.nim(732, 11) from sem/semexprs.nim(3070, 1)
             kind:stepNodeToSym
             to sym:
               Macro
                 flags: {Used, Global}
                 offset:2
                 typ:   Proc (args):
                 owner:  kind:skModule name:file

As you can clearly see now, the return values of this procedure are

> different here. We have successfully localized the location of the bug from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different here. We have successfully localized the bug from
```

-------

.. tip::

   It is perfeclty fine to add new debug trace options or remove some of
   the existing ones if you think it is necessary for you to better
   understand what is going on in the compiler.

.. tip::

    Sometimes it is necessary to print processed nodes for a specific part
    of the compiler procedure, but it is called multiple times on the code
    that does not show any issues, clobbering the final output and making
    it harder to figure out what was wrong.

    In that case you can wrap problematic (input) code with
    `{.define(nimCompilerDebug).}` and `{.undef(nimCompilerDebug).}`
    sections, and then check for the symbols definition using
    `debugutils.isCompilerDebug`, to filter out unnecessary noise.

    .. code-block:: nim

        if c.config.isCompilerDebug():
          # Check if we are in the `{.defined(nimCompilerDebug).}` section

          # Call any debugging logic you can think of
          echo c.config.treeRepr(result, maxPath = 1)

.. warning::

     Specific details of processing for modules in presence of multiple
     compile-time statements (such as `{.define().}`) is yet to be properly

>      specified and testsed, so when used for **cross-module** semantic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     specified and tested, so when used for **cross-module** semantic
```

`nimCompilerDebugCalltrace`  Call trace reports
`nimCompilerDebugTraceDir`   Write call traces to the directory
============================ =======

Semantic analysis
-----------------

When `nimDebugUtils` is enabled you can annotate section of the code to
trace how semantic analysis is performed on this block of code. Each
procedure that is annotated with one of the `addInNimDebugUtils()`
overloads is going to be traced in the execution tree. For example -
`sem.semOverloadedCall`, triggered when it is necessary to analyze call to
overloaded procedure.

.. code-block:: nim

    proc semOverloadedCall(c: PContext, n, nOrig: PNode,
                           filter: TSymKinds, flags: TExprFlags): PNode {.nosinks.} =
      addInNimDebugUtils(c.config, "semOverloadedCall")
      # Other implementaion parts ...

If you compile your test file with `nim c -d:nimCompilerDebugCalltrace
--filenames:canonical file.nim`:cmd: and annotate code block with the
`nimCompilerDebug` wrapper.

.. code-block:: nim

    {.define(nimCompilerDebug).}
    vmTarget(Obj())
    {.undef(nimCompilerDebug).}

You will get all the call entries traced

.. important::

>      Both *compiler* and your file must be compiled with defines - *main*
>      compiler requires `nimDebugUtils` (this guard exists to avoid heavy
>      performance hits), and your *test* compiler need to be run with
>      `nimCompilerDebugCalltrace` to control what exact parts of the default
>      debugger will be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     Both *compiler* and your file must be compiled with defines. The
     compiler must be built with `nimDebugUtils` (this guard avoids heavy
     performance hits). Your file must be compiled with
     `nimCompilerDebugCalltrace` to control which exact parts of the
     default debugger will be executed.
```
